Documentation on using multi level menus (#474)
primer/design: content/components/action-menu.mdx

import ComponentLayout from '~/src/layouts/component-layout'
export default ComponentLayout

> <Note>Multi level is not available yet in the React implementation.</Note>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>Multi level is not available yet in the React or Rails implementation.</Note>
```

## Usage

An action menu is a list of items, with each item representing an action, command, or current selection, which can be a single or multi-select.

<img
  width="960"
  alt=""
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/233374605-cee72894-fc5e-46f4-a1ea-e82aa26084ef.png"
/>

There are different ways to use menus, such as:

- **Button**: Shows items directly related to the current view.
- **Button (Selection)**: Shows items directly related to the button, with a title prefix, like "Sort by: Title."

> - **Context menu**: Often contains multiple levels and tends to be only available through right clicking items or through [icon buttons](/components/icon-button) that appear on hover.

Reviewer: I'm having a hard time comprehending this bit. The first two items are referring to how the trigger button works, and the last feels like a different thing. I wonder if it could be rephrased to talk about different _kinds_ of menus? Simple action, selection, or multi level?

Author: Agreed. I've rewritten this whole section and created a new section in `options` to stay focused on the action list primitives that can be used within this menu.

Let me know what you think.

It's important to note that each menu item should have consistent and limited interactions:

- `enter`, `click` or `tap`: Triggers an action or navigates into a submenu
- `arrow left`, `arrow up`, `arrow down`, `arrow right`: Navigates the menu

Menus are a commonly used feature across multiple platforms, and both [Apple](https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/components/menus-and-actions/menus) and [Microsoft](<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/desktop/bb226797(v=vs.85)>) have detailed documentation on their menus. To create a pleasant user experience, it's important to follow their expected behavior closely.

## Anatomy

<img
  width="960"

>   alt="Action menu opened with a label for the trigger (button), overlay (menu), and the internal action list."

Reviewer: Was there a decision made elsewhere to use `...` to indicate opening a dialog? This is a new pattern to me.

<img width="354" alt="screenshot of action menu with a danger button that opens a dialog" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18661030/234135298-a2130973-0a94-4979-8f15-29e9776c12e1.png">

Author: This came out of a earlier conversation you shared where it's confusing if a danger action will trigger a confirmation dialog or not. 

Both Apple and Microsoft indicate that a dialog will appear by showing a `...` at the back of the title. Therefore I think it's good practice to mimic this behaviour. 

<img width="630" alt="Screenshot 2023-04-25 at 10 37 54" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234237388-9df09478-3472-4827-8c3e-e36105250243.png">

Reviewer 2: It does seem to be a pattern used by macOS and Windows (maybe Linux too?), but I didn't realize "..." indicates a the menu item opens dialog until Max told me. It's not obvious - but I think it's ok to follow this pattern as long as it's not critical for users to know that a dialog will be opened.

Reviewer: I feel like it can easily look like truncated text 😅 but I think it's interesting and we should try it.

  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234074196-f67bf01e-29b6-4be1-a6fc-47fc532f536b.png"
/>

## Content

### Trigger

> Action menus can be opened through a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or by right clicking items.

Reviewer: > by right clicking items

I know this is a new pattern we are working on introducing, but what is an "item"? Could we be more specific here? Or is this not the right place to be specific 🤔 do you mean action list item?

Author: Updated it to `right clicking list items`. I reckon it's less likely to be used on action list items than generic list items or data table items.

  width="960"
  alt=""
/>

As the action menu is a highly adaptable component, it's crucial to keep the interactions with individual items limited. The following interactions are recommended:

- `enter`, `click`, or `tap`: These actions trigger an action or navigate into a submenu, based on the selected item.
- `arrow left`, `arrow up`, `arrow down`, `arrow right`: These actions can be used to navigate the menu, allowing the user to move between items and submenus with ease.

Menus are a commonly used feature across multiple platforms, and both [Apple](https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/components/menus-and-actions/menus) and [Microsoft](<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/desktop/bb226797(v=vs.85)>) have detailed documentation on their menus. To create a pleasant user experience, it's important to follow their expected behavior closely.

## Anatomy

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Action menu opened with a label for the trigger (button), overlay (menu), and the internal action list."
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234074196-f67bf01e-29b6-4be1-a6fc-47fc532f536b.png"
/>

## Content

### Open

> Action menus can be opened through a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or by right clicking list items.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should be more specific about what kind of list items open a menu when right clicking.

```suggestion
Action menus can be opened through a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or by right clicking list items that have a custom context menu associated with them.
```

I can help refine the wording if you're on board with this idea.

  </div>
</Box>

### Items

> The focus should always remain on a menu item therefore it can't include additional form elements like `button`, `input`, `checkbox`...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The focus should always remain on menu items, and the menu shouldn't include additional form elements like `button`, `input`, or `checkbox`.
```

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234083626-6d8f4def-eccd-429b-b815-81071502a2a7.png"
    />
    <Caption>Use ActionMenu for quick actions.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234083619-40ebf8b6-6194-4e66-a7e8-597ee43f9ed8.png"
    />
    <Caption>
      Don't add form controls like a filterable input, use <a href="/components/selectpanel">SelectPanel</a> instead.
    </Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> Even though single or multi selection is possible within a menu the underlying semantics are not form elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While single and multi selection is offered within a menu, the underlying semantics are not true form elements.
```

      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232558685-0874d0dd-6d58-42d6-a19b-be19cdf32cf8.png"
    />
    <Caption>If you want to present filterable data do this through a dialog.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232547208-aa63f85b-cc9c-4fd2-8222-c26ac993c0cc.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't add additional form elements inside a menu.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

Since you can't include form elements within a menu that also means that you can't combine a [select panel](/components/selectpanel) with a action menu.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234094256-abf3f1ad-2d90-48f9-84aa-a8e17cc64c47.png"
    />
    <Caption>If you want to present filterable data do this through a dialog.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234094263-399afdd0-b2e5-45dc-a218-db4a7dcdd9be.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't mix select panels with action menus.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> When using submenus don't use the trailing visual to communicate selected values within their submenu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using submenus, don't use the trailing visual to communicate selected values within its submenu.
```

Leave this space for submenu indicators.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232562573-a687110d-06cb-4756-8fb3-6b7e05665dd4.png"
    />
    <Caption>Use trailing visuals for submenu indicators or keyboard shortcuts.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232562567-bb96a0cb-a796-4834-bf91-e3ddff86c312.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't use trailing visual to communicate selected items in submenus.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> On smaller viewports the menu should always be repositioned to fit within the viewport. This could mean that a submenu overlaps it's parent menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On smaller viewports, the menu should always be re-positioned to fit within the viewport. This could mean that a submenu overlaps it's parent menu.
```

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/233361999-3b5ab994-152d-455e-b9bc-a9170a1951b1.png"
    />
    <Caption>Reposition menus to stay within the viewport, especially on narrow viewports.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/233361993-cf3e0b21-e584-4780-a0e1-42f03fc4d395.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't position menus off screen, especially on narrow viewports.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

## Options

<img
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18661030/226486461-c43f75c5-d9ed-415f-907c-9d2dbf71e3a2.png"
  width="960"
  alt=""
/>
<Caption>
  The trigger button can be a standard or icon button. For single select menus that display the selection in the
  trigger, a label must be persist either internally or externally.
</Caption>

<img
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234111244-aa3e9e6c-5ec4-4dbb-b0e9-fc11e97f6eba.png"
  width="960"
  alt=""
/>

> <Caption>Menus can contain simple actions, links, single select items, multi select items or toggles.</Caption>

Reviewer: What do you mean by toggles here?

Author: They are individual selections that behave like toggles. For example in Safari when you click the developer menu open you can disable images. This behaves as a toggle.

<img width="527" alt="Screenshot 2023-04-25 at 10 26 41" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234234480-59869d19-c6b8-4020-8fce-5dd2aab23397.png">

  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232508233-78d0460d-c891-42be-929d-ff0465313805.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't use crossmark icons for single or multi select items.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Dividers

To enhance the readability of menus that contain numerous item descriptions, it is recommended to incorporate dividers. This can effectively prevent the menu from becoming overwhelming.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234297298-76d14987-2ecb-4165-9f5d-ada0fd1c7e17.png"
    />
    <Caption>Introduce dividers for items with heavy descriptions to improve readability.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234297304-0cfdd597-fc79-4394-bb74-b37ec1276bd6.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't forget to add dividers when the menu content starts to look heavy.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Trailing visuals

> Don't use trailing visuals to add additional interactions instead keep them reserved for submenu indicators or keyboard shortcuts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoid using trailing visuals to add additional interactions, which reserves them for submenu indicators or keyboard shortcuts.
```

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234299628-3c8a8613-7a2f-4f4a-83da-14eab2f28032.png"
    />
    <Caption>Create a new section for additional functionality.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/234299623-927d9309-9991-496c-b707-b6f358583928.png"
    />
    <Caption>Don't store additional toggleable functionality in trailing visuals.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Multi-level

A menu with multiple levels is a common UI component used in desktop and mobile applications. It allows users to access nested subitems without cluttering the screen.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Action menu opened with a label for the trigger (button), overlay (menu), and the internal action list."
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232519615-d10c928d-5253-4c54-bc66-7fa1e0f85b08.png"
/>

> It's important to understand that menus can't include additional form elements like inputs. That means if you want to provide a input that filters the subitems that you can't rely on this component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's important to understand that menus can't include additional form elements like inputs. That means if you want to provide a input that filters the subitems that you can't rely on this component. Alternatively, you can use a [select panel](/components/selectpanel) or open a [dialog](/components/dialog) instead of a submenu.
```

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232558685-0874d0dd-6d58-42d6-a19b-be19cdf32cf8.png"
    />

>     <Caption>If you want to present filterable data do this through a dialog.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Caption>If you want to present filterable data open a dialog instead of a submenu.</Caption>
```

  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt=""
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980622/232547208-aa63f85b-cc9c-4fd2-8222-c26ac993c0cc.png"
    />

>     <Caption>Don't add additional form elements inside a menu.</Caption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Caption>Don't use form elements inside a menu.</Caption>
```

## Related components

- [Action list](/components/action-list)
- [Button](/components/button)
- [Icon button](/components/icon-button)

> - [Select panel](https://primer.style/react/SelectPanel)

Reviewer 2: Not related to this PR, but worth updating while we're in here 🙂 

```suggestion
- [Select panel](/components/selectpanel)
```
